tech.md, before:

---
title: Technology and Platforms
layout: single
toc: true
toc_label: "Tech"
tags: syllabus grades policies 
---

The following is a list of technologies with which I expect you to
familiarize yourself and be prepared to use as a part of participating
in our class.

## Course Homepage

I constructed our course homepage as a Jekyll site built with Github
Pages. You should directly submit corrections and improvements as
[pull requests]({{ site.sourceurl }}{{ site.repository }}). Every page
on this website has a direct links to its `.md` file in this
repository.

If you are unfamiliar with making pull requests, you can find plenty
of documentation both from your terminal and [on the
web](https://docs.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request)

## Racket

[Download](https://download.racket-lang.org/) and install Racket and
the DrRacket integrated development environment. You should make sure
you have the most up-to-date version of DrRacket for this course, we
should all be on the same version. To begin with, I will use DrRacket
in front of the classroom to demonstrate Racket and miniKanren
programming, and I want you all to follow along and to practice during
designated practice periods.

### DSLS2

In this class we will use the
[DSSL2](https://docs.racket-lang.org/dssl2/index.html) data structures
teaching language for our programming assignments. This language is a
close analogue of python, and will help you become familiar with some
of the vagaries of python as well as the data structures you will be
implementing.

## Github

As a computer scientist, you will be expected to know and be familiar
with version control systems (VCS) like git. To that end I will use
github as a means of distributing materials in different portions of
this class. It will be your job to know how to navigate a source
repository and to access information. Keeping track of your work in a
VCS is also a good idea. I will ask that you keep these repositories
private, for the benefit of current and future classmates.

## Blackboard

In that same spirit, I will use blackboard to distribute some
materials, and may use it to accept assignments. 

Please do not use Blackboard messages/comments to communicate with me;
I will not check them and anyway they are very easy to miss.

Commit message:

s/Blackboard/Canvas (w/gradescope<->canvas browser extension)/

tech.md, after:

---
title: Technology and Platforms
layout: single
toc: true
toc_label: "Tech"
tags: syllabus grades policies 
---

The following is a list of technologies with which I expect you to
familiarize yourself and be prepared to use as a part of participating
in our class.

## Course Homepage

I constructed our course homepage as a Jekyll site built with Github
Pages. You should directly submit corrections and improvements as
[pull requests]({{ site.sourceurl }}{{ site.repository }}). Every page
on this website has a direct links to its `.md` file in this
repository.

If you are unfamiliar with making pull requests, you can find plenty
of documentation both from your terminal and [on the
web](https://docs.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/creating-a-pull-request)

## Racket

[Download](https://download.racket-lang.org/) and install Racket and
the DrRacket integrated development environment. You should make sure
you have the most up-to-date version of DrRacket for this course, we
should all be on the same version. To begin with, I will use DrRacket
in front of the classroom to demonstrate Racket and miniKanren
programming, and I want you all to follow along and to practice during
designated practice periods.

### DSLS2

In this class we will use the
[DSSL2](https://docs.racket-lang.org/dssl2/index.html) data structures
teaching language for our programming assignments. This language is a
close analogue of python, and will help you become familiar with some
of the vagaries of python as well as the data structures you will be
implementing.

## Github

As a computer scientist, you will be expected to know and be familiar
with version control systems (VCS) like git. To that end I will use
github as a means of distributing materials in different portions of
this class. It will be your job to know how to navigate a source
repository and to access information. Keeping track of your work in a
VCS is also a good idea. I will ask that you keep these repositories
private, for the benefit of current and future classmates.


## Gradescope and Canvas 

At this [GitHub URL](https://github.com/UseBetterCanvas/canvas-task-extension) you will find a link to a browser extension to add your Gradescope assignments and their due dates to your Canvas site. If you are a Canvas user, you might find this helpful to track all of your assignments in one place.
